TODO:

[ ] fix citation below JOURNAL, DOI
[ ] Zenodo, badge

# Dead zones, obstructions, and missed captures: a novel approach for determining the Effective Capture Area for remote camera traps

- Authors:
     - B.M. Carswell
     - T. Avgar
     - G.M. Street
     - [Sean Boyle](https://sites.google.com/prod/view/seanboylephd)
     - [Eric Vander Wal](https://weel.gitlab.io/)


This repository contains the code accompanying the paper "Dead zones,
obstructions, and missed captures: a novel approach for determining the
Effective Capture Area for remote camera traps" JOURNAL. DOI

Scripts are under `scripts/`.

## Abstract

Camera traps have become cemented as an important tool of wildlife research,
yet, their utility is now extending beyond researchers, as cameras can
contribute to more inclusive methods of place-based wildlife management. From
recent advances in analytics and technology, camera trap-based density estimates
of wildlife is an emerging field of research. Most camera trap-based density
methods require an estimate of the area monitored by each camera, a relatively
novel parameter that may be highly variable and is rarely quantified in
literature.

Here, we developed and tested a standardized field and analytical method
allowing us to predict the probability of photographic capture as it varies
within the camera viewshed. We investigated how capture probability changes due
to environmental influences, i.e., shrub cover, ambient temperature, speed of
subject, time of day, in addition to internal factors from cameras themselves,
i.e., sensitivity settings, number of photos taken, and camera trap brand. We
then use our method to gain standardized, accurate, and predictable estimates of
the area a camera monitors, the Effective Capture Area (ECA).

We found that ECAs in our study areas are heavily influenced by
location-specific environmental factors, i.e., vegetation structure,
technological delays associated with cameras themselves, i.e., refractory
period, and custom internal camera settings, i.e., sensitivity, number of
photographs taken. We also found that the ECAs computed using our methodology
are substantially smaller than reported values in the literature.

Imprecision surrounding camera trap viewshed areas can create propagating bias
when implementing viewshed-based density estimators. Our method and Effective
Capture Area calculation may help increase the reliability of camera trap-based
density estimation methods, provide a framework to help improve camera-trap
occupancy modelling, and contribute to more accessible wildlife management
practices.

